README.md, before:

# richards-nitsche-signorini

Reproducibility code for:

> **Operator-split mixed finite elements for Richards equation with Nitsche-Signorini seepage conditions**
>
> Camilo Tello Fachin, Federico Gatti, Wouter Tonnon
>
> *Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering* (submitted)

## Quick start

### Prerequisites

Install [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/) (Python package manager):

```bash
# macOS
brew install uv

# Linux
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
```

### Install & run

```bash
git clone https://github.com/tellocam/richards-nitsche-signorini.git
cd richards-nitsche-signorini
uv sync                    # install dependencies
uv run python scripts/fig_test1_clay_baseline.py   # generate one figure
```

The generated figure is saved to `figures/`. Pre-computed data in `data/`
is used by default; pass `--recompute` to re-run the simulation from scratch.

## Repository structure

```
richards-nitsche-signorini/
├── pyproject.toml                          # Project metadata & dependencies
├── uv.lock                                 # Locked dependency versions
├── Makefile                                # Convenience targets (figures, notebooks, clean)
├── LICENSE                                 # MIT license
│
├── src/nitsche_signorini/                  # Python package (installed via uv sync)
│   ├── __init__.py                         # Public API exports
│   ├── common.py                           # CoefficientFunction helpers
│   ├── constitutive.py                     # Sharp van Genuchten-Mualem model
│   ├── materials.py                        # Soil parameter presets (CLAY, SAND, ...)
│   ├── splitting.py                        # Lie-Trotter operator splitting core
│   └── runners.py                          # Time-stepping runners for all test cases
│
├── scripts/                                # Figure-generation scripts (one per paper figure)
│   ├── README.md                           # Script inventory & notes on retired experiments
│   ├── _style.py                           # Shared matplotlib rcParams & path constants
│   ├── fig_test1_clay_baseline.py          # Fig. 1: clay + monolithic Nitsche-Signorini
│   ├── fig_test2a_convergence_spatial.py   # Fig. 2: spatial convergence (manufactured soln)
│   ├── fig_test2b_convergence_temporal.py  # Table:  temporal convergence (backward Euler)
│   ├── fig_test3a_mono_vs_split.py         # Fig. 3: monolithic fails, splitting fixes it
│   ├── fig_test3b_splitting_5m.py          # Fig. 4: splitting on 5 m sand column
│   ├── fig_test3c_front_speed.py           # Fig. 5: front speed vs Rankine-Hugoniot ODE
│   ├── fig_test4_rain_switching.py         # Fig. 6: bidirectional Signorini switching
│   ├── fig_test2_splitting_temporal.py     # (retired) splitting temporal convergence
│   └── _diag_cauchy.py                     # (retired) Cauchy diagnostic
│
├── notebooks/                              # Interactive Jupyter notebooks
│   ├── 01_clay_baseline.ipynb              # Clay baseline walkthrough
│   ├── 02_convergence_study.ipynb          # Convergence rate exploration
│   ├── 03_sand_splitting.ipynb             # Operator splitting on sand
│   ├── 04_signorini_switching.ipynb        # Dynamic boundary switching
│   └── 05_failed_approaches.ipynb          # Why standard methods fail for sand
│
├── data/                                   # Pre-computed results (.npz cache, 132 KB)
│   └── *.npz                               # One file per test case
│
├── figures/                                # Generated PDF figures (not committed)
│   └── *.pdf                               # One file per script
│
└── formalization/                          # Lean 4 formalization of Section 4
    ├── lakefile.toml
    ├── RichardsNitscheSignorini.lean       # Root import
    ├── RichardsNitscheSignorini/
    │   ├── Main.lean                       # Proof chain (Props 4.1-4.9, Thm 4.10)
    │   └── Foundations/                    # Endpoint filters, constitutive axioms
    ├── graphs/                             # Proof dependency graph (generated)
    └── scripts/                            # Graph generation script
```

## Figure index

| Script | Paper element | Description | ~Runtime |
|--------|--------------|-------------|----------|
| `fig_test1_clay_baseline.py` | Fig. 1 | Clay baseline: psi(z) and q_z(z) profiles | 1 min |
| `fig_test2a_convergence_spatial.py` | Fig. 2 + Table | Spatial convergence (manufactured solution) | 2 min |
| `fig_test2b_convergence_temporal.py` | Table | Temporal convergence (backward Euler) | 3 min |
| `fig_test3a_mono_vs_split.py` | Fig. 3 + Table | Monolithic vs splitting, sand H=2m | 5 min |
| `fig_test3b_splitting_5m.py` | Fig. 4 | Splitting on sand H=5m (was STAGNATED) | 5 min |
| `fig_test3c_front_speed.py` | Fig. 5 | Front speed validation vs Rankine-Hugoniot | 8 min |
| `fig_test4_rain_switching.py` | Fig. 6 | Bidirectional Signorini switching | 5 min |

## Generate all figures

```bash
make figures
# or: for f in scripts/fig_test*.py; do uv run python "$f"; done
```

Total runtime: approximately 30 minutes on a modern workstation (instant with cached data).

## Notebooks

Interactive Jupyter notebooks for exploration and education.

| Notebook | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `01_clay_baseline.ipynb` | Clay baseline (monolithic method), reproduces Gatti et al. Figure 6 |
| `02_convergence_study.ipynb` | Spatial and temporal convergence rates |
| `03_sand_splitting.ipynb` | Operator splitting on sand (the stabilised method) |
| `04_signorini_switching.ipynb` | Dynamic Signorini switching under time-varying rain |
| `05_failed_approaches.ipynb` | **Failed approaches**: why standard methods fail for sand |

Notebook 05 documents the systematic investigation of alternative methods
(broken RT0, HDG, TVB limiter, linearised schemes) and demonstrates that
all fail due to the same root cause: $K^{-1}$ blow-up spanning ~7 orders
of magnitude for sand. This motivates the operator splitting approach.

```bash
uv sync --extra notebooks   # install Jupyter (first time only)
uv run jupyter lab notebooks/
# or: make notebooks
```

## Library overview

The `src/nitsche_signorini/` package provides:

| Module | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `common.py` | CoefficientFunction helpers (`clamp_cf`, `pow_cf`, `ez_cf`) |
| `constitutive.py` | Sharp van Genuchten-Mualem constitutive law (no regularization) |
| `materials.py` | Soil parameter presets (CLAY, SAND, SANDY_LOAM) |
| `splitting.py` | Lie-Trotter operator splitting: Godunov upwind + mixed FEM diffusion + Nitsche-Signorini BCs |
| `runners.py` | Time-stepping runners for all test cases |

## Solver parameters

| Parameter | Clay (Test 1) | Sand splitting (Tests 3-4) |
|-----------|--------------|---------------------------|
| FE space | RT0 x P0 | RT0 x P0 |
| Solver | Newton (monolithic) | Newton (diffusion step only) |
| Convection | implicit (gravity in flux eq.) | explicit Godunov subcycled |
| Nitsche gamma_0 | 1e-10 | 1e-10 |
| Newton tol | 1e-6 | 1e-3 (splitting), 5e-3 (rain switching) |
| Linear solver | PARDISO | PARDISO |

## Dependencies

- Python >= 3.12
- [NGSolve](https://ngsolve.org/) (finite element library, includes PARDISO solver)
- NumPy, SciPy, matplotlib

All dependencies are managed via `pyproject.toml` and installable with `uv sync`.
Works on Linux (x86_64) and macOS (Intel & Apple Silicon).

## Formalization

A Lean 4 formalization of the analytical results from Section 4 of the paper.

### Overview

The `formalization/` directory contains a machine-checked proof of the theoretical
results in Section 4. It formalizes Propositions 4.1–4.9, Corollaries 4.6a–b, and Theorem 4.10 using
Lean 4 + Mathlib v4.27.0. The formalization is standalone (no dependencies beyond
Mathlib) and is organized into two layers: a Foundations layer (endpoint filters,
constitutive model axioms) and a Main proof chain that builds the convergence
argument step by step.

### Building

```bash
cd formalization
lake exe cache get    # Download precompiled Mathlib (~5 min first time)
lake build            # Verify all proofs (~2 min)
```

### Theorem Inventory

| Paper ref | Lean name | Type | Classification |
|-----------|-----------|------|----------------|
| §4.1, eq. (4.5)–(4.13) | `K_Se_zero`, `K_Se_one`, ..., `C_Se_asymp_dry` | axiom (×10) | Established (Mualem 1976, vG 1980) |
| Prop 4.1 | `prop_4_1_dry_end_asymp`, `prop_4_1_D_tends_zero` | axiom | Established |
| Prop 4.2 | `prop_4_2_saturation_blowup`, `prop_4_2_D_tends_top` | axiom | Established |
| Prop 4.3 | `prop_4_3_RH_speed`, `prop_4_3_lax_entropy` | theorem | Proved |
| Prop 4.4a,b | `prop_4_4a_existence`, `prop_4_4b_L1_contraction` | axiom | Established (Carrillo 1999) |
| Prop 4.4c | `prop_4_4c_uniqueness` | axiom | Established |
| Prop 4.5 | `prop_4_5_front_ratio` | axiom | Established |
| Cor 4.6a,b | `cor_4_6a_Kinv_blowup`, `cor_4_6b_condition_number` | axiom | Established |
| — | `K_inv_at_one` | theorem | Proved |
| Prop 4.7 | `prop_4_7_splitting_error` | axiom | Established (Jakobsen-Karlsen 2005) |
| — | `splitting_error_vanishes`, `splitting_improves_with_Gr` | theorem | Proved |
| Prop 4.8 | `prop_4_8_godunov_sub` | axiom | Established (Kuznetsov 1976) |
| Prop 4.9 | `prop_4_9_godunov_sat` | axiom | Novel |
| — | `sat_rate_worse_than_sub` | theorem | Proved |
| — | `diffusion_error_Oh` | axiom | Established (Brezzi-Fortin 1991) |
| Thm 4.10(a) | `thm_4_10_combined_sub` | theorem | Proved |
| Thm 4.10(b) | `thm_4_10_combined_sat` | theorem | Proved |
| — | `spatial_rate_sublinear` | theorem | Proved |
| — | `splitting_accuracy_improves_with_degeneracy` | theorem | Proved |

Summary: 19 axioms, 1 opaque definition, 5 definitions, 12 proved theorems.

### Classification Scheme

Every declaration in `Main.lean` carries one of these tags:

- `[Established: Citation]` — known result from the literature, axiomatized with reference
- `[Novel: Citation]` — original contribution of this paper
- `[Proved: chain description]` — theorem proved in Lean from the axioms above

### File Structure

```
formalization/
├── lakefile.toml
├── lean-toolchain
├── RichardsNitscheSignorini.lean          # Root import
├── RichardsNitscheSignorini/
│   ├── Main.lean                           # Proof chain (Props 4.1-4.9, Thm 4.10)
│   └── Foundations/
│       ├── Filters.lean                    # Endpoint filters (Se → 0+, Se → 1-)
│       └── ConstitutiveModel.lean          # VGM params, K/C/D functions, axioms
├── graphs/
│   ├── proof_chain.dot                     # Graphviz source (generated)
│   └── proof_chain.pdf                     # Proof dependency graph (generated)
└── scripts/
    └── generate_proof_graph.py             # Proof chain visualization
```

The formalization is released under the MIT license.

## License

MIT. See [LICENSE](LICENSE).

Commit message:

Update README intro to describe both reproducibility code and formalization

README.md, after:

# richards-nitsche-signorini

Reproducibility code and Lean 4 formalization for:

> **Operator-split mixed finite elements for Richards equation with Nitsche-Signorini seepage conditions**
>
> Camilo Tello Fachin, Federico Gatti, Wouter Tonnon
>
> *Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering* (submitted)

This repository contains two components:

- **Reproducibility code** (Python/NGSolve) — operator-split mixed finite element solver, figure-generation scripts, interactive notebooks, and pre-computed data to reproduce all results in the paper.
- **Lean 4 formalization** — machine-checked proofs of the analytical results in Section 4 (degeneracy asymptotics, shock structure, conservation law, operator-splitting error, and combined convergence estimates).

## Quick start

### Prerequisites

Install [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/) (Python package manager):

```bash
# macOS
brew install uv

# Linux
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
```

### Install & run

```bash
git clone https://github.com/tellocam/richards-nitsche-signorini.git
cd richards-nitsche-signorini
uv sync                    # install dependencies
uv run python scripts/fig_test1_clay_baseline.py   # generate one figure
```

The generated figure is saved to `figures/`. Pre-computed data in `data/`
is used by default; pass `--recompute` to re-run the simulation from scratch.

## Repository structure

```
richards-nitsche-signorini/
├── pyproject.toml                          # Project metadata & dependencies
├── uv.lock                                 # Locked dependency versions
├── Makefile                                # Convenience targets (figures, notebooks, clean)
├── LICENSE                                 # MIT license
│
├── src/nitsche_signorini/                  # Python package (installed via uv sync)
│   ├── __init__.py                         # Public API exports
│   ├── common.py                           # CoefficientFunction helpers
│   ├── constitutive.py                     # Sharp van Genuchten-Mualem model
│   ├── materials.py                        # Soil parameter presets (CLAY, SAND, ...)
│   ├── splitting.py                        # Lie-Trotter operator splitting core
│   └── runners.py                          # Time-stepping runners for all test cases
│
├── scripts/                                # Figure-generation scripts (one per paper figure)
│   ├── README.md                           # Script inventory & notes on retired experiments
│   ├── _style.py                           # Shared matplotlib rcParams & path constants
│   ├── fig_test1_clay_baseline.py          # Fig. 1: clay + monolithic Nitsche-Signorini
│   ├── fig_test2a_convergence_spatial.py   # Fig. 2: spatial convergence (manufactured soln)
│   ├── fig_test2b_convergence_temporal.py  # Table:  temporal convergence (backward Euler)
│   ├── fig_test3a_mono_vs_split.py         # Fig. 3: monolithic fails, splitting fixes it
│   ├── fig_test3b_splitting_5m.py          # Fig. 4: splitting on 5 m sand column
│   ├── fig_test3c_front_speed.py           # Fig. 5: front speed vs Rankine-Hugoniot ODE
│   ├── fig_test4_rain_switching.py         # Fig. 6: bidirectional Signorini switching
│   ├── fig_test2_splitting_temporal.py     # (retired) splitting temporal convergence
│   └── _diag_cauchy.py                     # (retired) Cauchy diagnostic
│
├── notebooks/                              # Interactive Jupyter notebooks
│   ├── 01_clay_baseline.ipynb              # Clay baseline walkthrough
│   ├── 02_convergence_study.ipynb          # Convergence rate exploration
│   ├── 03_sand_splitting.ipynb             # Operator splitting on sand
│   ├── 04_signorini_switching.ipynb        # Dynamic boundary switching
│   └── 05_failed_approaches.ipynb          # Why standard methods fail for sand
│
├── data/                                   # Pre-computed results (.npz cache, 132 KB)
│   └── *.npz                               # One file per test case
│
├── figures/                                # Generated PDF figures (not committed)
│   └── *.pdf                               # One file per script
│
└── formalization/                          # Lean 4 formalization of Section 4
    ├── lakefile.toml
    ├── RichardsNitscheSignorini.lean       # Root import
    ├── RichardsNitscheSignorini/
    │   ├── Main.lean                       # Proof chain (Props 4.1-4.9, Thm 4.10)
    │   └── Foundations/                    # Endpoint filters, constitutive axioms
    ├── graphs/                             # Proof dependency graph (generated)
    └── scripts/                            # Graph generation script
```

## Figure index

| Script | Paper element | Description | ~Runtime |
|--------|--------------|-------------|----------|
| `fig_test1_clay_baseline.py` | Fig. 1 | Clay baseline: psi(z) and q_z(z) profiles | 1 min |
| `fig_test2a_convergence_spatial.py` | Fig. 2 + Table | Spatial convergence (manufactured solution) | 2 min |
| `fig_test2b_convergence_temporal.py` | Table | Temporal convergence (backward Euler) | 3 min |
| `fig_test3a_mono_vs_split.py` | Fig. 3 + Table | Monolithic vs splitting, sand H=2m | 5 min |
| `fig_test3b_splitting_5m.py` | Fig. 4 | Splitting on sand H=5m (was STAGNATED) | 5 min |
| `fig_test3c_front_speed.py` | Fig. 5 | Front speed validation vs Rankine-Hugoniot | 8 min |
| `fig_test4_rain_switching.py` | Fig. 6 | Bidirectional Signorini switching | 5 min |

## Generate all figures

```bash
make figures
# or: for f in scripts/fig_test*.py; do uv run python "$f"; done
```

Total runtime: approximately 30 minutes on a modern workstation (instant with cached data).

## Notebooks

Interactive Jupyter notebooks for exploration and education.

| Notebook | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `01_clay_baseline.ipynb` | Clay baseline (monolithic method), reproduces Gatti et al. Figure 6 |
| `02_convergence_study.ipynb` | Spatial and temporal convergence rates |
| `03_sand_splitting.ipynb` | Operator splitting on sand (the stabilised method) |
| `04_signorini_switching.ipynb` | Dynamic Signorini switching under time-varying rain |
| `05_failed_approaches.ipynb` | **Failed approaches**: why standard methods fail for sand |

Notebook 05 documents the systematic investigation of alternative methods
(broken RT0, HDG, TVB limiter, linearised schemes) and demonstrates that
all fail due to the same root cause: $K^{-1}$ blow-up spanning ~7 orders
of magnitude for sand. This motivates the operator splitting approach.

```bash
uv sync --extra notebooks   # install Jupyter (first time only)
uv run jupyter lab notebooks/
# or: make notebooks
```

## Library overview

The `src/nitsche_signorini/` package provides:

| Module | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `common.py` | CoefficientFunction helpers (`clamp_cf`, `pow_cf`, `ez_cf`) |
| `constitutive.py` | Sharp van Genuchten-Mualem constitutive law (no regularization) |
| `materials.py` | Soil parameter presets (CLAY, SAND, SANDY_LOAM) |
| `splitting.py` | Lie-Trotter operator splitting: Godunov upwind + mixed FEM diffusion + Nitsche-Signorini BCs |
| `runners.py` | Time-stepping runners for all test cases |

## Solver parameters

| Parameter | Clay (Test 1) | Sand splitting (Tests 3-4) |
|-----------|--------------|---------------------------|
| FE space | RT0 x P0 | RT0 x P0 |
| Solver | Newton (monolithic) | Newton (diffusion step only) |
| Convection | implicit (gravity in flux eq.) | explicit Godunov subcycled |
| Nitsche gamma_0 | 1e-10 | 1e-10 |
| Newton tol | 1e-6 | 1e-3 (splitting), 5e-3 (rain switching) |
| Linear solver | PARDISO | PARDISO |

## Dependencies

- Python >= 3.12
- [NGSolve](https://ngsolve.org/) (finite element library, includes PARDISO solver)
- NumPy, SciPy, matplotlib

All dependencies are managed via `pyproject.toml` and installable with `uv sync`.
Works on Linux (x86_64) and macOS (Intel & Apple Silicon).

## Formalization

A Lean 4 formalization of the analytical results from Section 4 of the paper.

### Overview

The `formalization/` directory contains a machine-checked proof of the theoretical
results in Section 4. It formalizes Propositions 4.1–4.9, Corollaries 4.6a–b, and Theorem 4.10 using
Lean 4 + Mathlib v4.27.0. The formalization is standalone (no dependencies beyond
Mathlib) and is organized into two layers: a Foundations layer (endpoint filters,
constitutive model axioms) and a Main proof chain that builds the convergence
argument step by step.

### Building

```bash
cd formalization
lake exe cache get    # Download precompiled Mathlib (~5 min first time)
lake build            # Verify all proofs (~2 min)
```

### Theorem Inventory

| Paper ref | Lean name | Type | Classification |
|-----------|-----------|------|----------------|
| §4.1, eq. (4.5)–(4.13) | `K_Se_zero`, `K_Se_one`, ..., `C_Se_asymp_dry` | axiom (×10) | Established (Mualem 1976, vG 1980) |
| Prop 4.1 | `prop_4_1_dry_end_asymp`, `prop_4_1_D_tends_zero` | axiom | Established |
| Prop 4.2 | `prop_4_2_saturation_blowup`, `prop_4_2_D_tends_top` | axiom | Established |
| Prop 4.3 | `prop_4_3_RH_speed`, `prop_4_3_lax_entropy` | theorem | Proved |
| Prop 4.4a,b | `prop_4_4a_existence`, `prop_4_4b_L1_contraction` | axiom | Established (Carrillo 1999) |
| Prop 4.4c | `prop_4_4c_uniqueness` | axiom | Established |
| Prop 4.5 | `prop_4_5_front_ratio` | axiom | Established |
| Cor 4.6a,b | `cor_4_6a_Kinv_blowup`, `cor_4_6b_condition_number` | axiom | Established |
| — | `K_inv_at_one` | theorem | Proved |
| Prop 4.7 | `prop_4_7_splitting_error` | axiom | Established (Jakobsen-Karlsen 2005) |
| — | `splitting_error_vanishes`, `splitting_improves_with_Gr` | theorem | Proved |
| Prop 4.8 | `prop_4_8_godunov_sub` | axiom | Established (Kuznetsov 1976) |
| Prop 4.9 | `prop_4_9_godunov_sat` | axiom | Novel |
| — | `sat_rate_worse_than_sub` | theorem | Proved |
| — | `diffusion_error_Oh` | axiom | Established (Brezzi-Fortin 1991) |
| Thm 4.10(a) | `thm_4_10_combined_sub` | theorem | Proved |
| Thm 4.10(b) | `thm_4_10_combined_sat` | theorem | Proved |
| — | `spatial_rate_sublinear` | theorem | Proved |
| — | `splitting_accuracy_improves_with_degeneracy` | theorem | Proved |

Summary: 19 axioms, 1 opaque definition, 5 definitions, 12 proved theorems.

### Classification Scheme

Every declaration in `Main.lean` carries one of these tags:

- `[Established: Citation]` — known result from the literature, axiomatized with reference
- `[Novel: Citation]` — original contribution of this paper
- `[Proved: chain description]` — theorem proved in Lean from the axioms above

### File Structure

```
formalization/
├── lakefile.toml
├── lean-toolchain
├── RichardsNitscheSignorini.lean          # Root import
├── RichardsNitscheSignorini/
│   ├── Main.lean                           # Proof chain (Props 4.1-4.9, Thm 4.10)
│   └── Foundations/
│       ├── Filters.lean                    # Endpoint filters (Se → 0+, Se → 1-)
│       └── ConstitutiveModel.lean          # VGM params, K/C/D functions, axioms
├── graphs/
│   ├── proof_chain.dot                     # Graphviz source (generated)
│   └── proof_chain.pdf                     # Proof dependency graph (generated)
└── scripts/
    └── generate_proof_graph.py             # Proof chain visualization
```

The formalization is released under the MIT license.

## License

MIT. See [LICENSE](LICENSE).
